Training and learning is a major part of change. Individuals learn in different ways and at different paces. We gain by providing a variety of training, and ensuring it is timely and relevant. One model we can use to help with this is ADKAR (e.g., to help us determine what type of training is needed and when).

The earlier we establish concrete plans around re-skilling and development opportunities for our people, the more likely we can reduce fear and uncertainty about the change. The SCARF model (see ''[https://articles.alpha.canada.ca/framework-for-leading-change/engaging-with-key-stakeholders/ Section 5: Getting people on board / Engaging with key stakeholders / SCARF]'') is a good tool to help validate how we meet people’s various needs through training (e.g., personalizing our training to individual needs).

The training needs will be specific to the change and to each stakeholder/group. That being said, a combination of more conceptual developmental opportunities, such as coaching, change leadership, transition, and resilience training for managers and staff, as well as whatever technical training is required, offers a holistic approach.

There are a variety of templates we can use if we choose to do so. One example is based on a [https://articles.alpha.canada.ca/uploads/sites/46/2022/11/Learning-training-plan-template.doc learning and training plan] developed at the Department of National Defence.

A second example is the [https://wiki.gccollab.ca/images/1/10/004_WCM_Training_Plan_Template.docx training plan template] developed by the Change Management National Centre of Expertise in Accommodation Management and Workplace Solutions at Public Services and Procurement Canada.

'''''*Note'''''_: the training plan template is specific to workplace modernization in the public service but can be adapted to suit other changes. Further, this template is based on the ADKAR model from the Prosci methodology and provides space to include content related to this. Because our approach may not be based on Prosci, we can just remove these sections in the template._


-----

[https://articles.alpha.canada.ca/framework-for-leading-change/reinforcement-sustainability-plan/ Next: Reinforcement/sustainability plan]

[https://articles.alpha.canada.ca/framework-for-leading-change/developing-our-plans/ Back to beginning of section]


-----
